=== PAGE 3 ===
Leakage and the Reproducibility Crisis in ML-based Science
Kapoor and Narayanan
Paper 
Muchlinski et al. 
Colaresi and Mahmood 
Wang 
Kaufman et al. 
Claim 
Random Forests model 
drastically outperforms Logistic 
regression models  
Random Forests models drastically 
outperform Logistic regression 
model  
Adaboost and Gradient Boosted 
Trees (GBT) drastically outperform 
other models  
Adaboost outperforms other models  
Error 
[L1.2] Pre-proc. on train-test  
(Incorrect imputation) 
 [L1.2] Pre-proc. on train-test 
(Incorrect reuse of an imputed 
dataset) 
[L1.2] Pre-proc. on train-test. 
(Incorrect reuse of an imputed dataset) 
[L3.1] Temporal leakage (k-fold cross 
validation with temporal data) 
[L2] Illegitimate features (Data 
leakage due to proxy variables) 
[L3.1] Temporal leakage (k-fold 
cross validation with temporal data) 
 
Impact 
Random Forests perform no 
better than Logistic Regression 
Random Forests perform no better 
than Logistic Regression 
Difference in AUC between Adaboost 
and Logistic Regression drops from 
0.14 to 0.01 
Adaboost no longer outperforms 
Logistic Regression.  
None of the models outperform a 
baseline model that predicts the 
outcome of the previous year 
 
Discussion 
Impact of the incorrect 
imputation is severe since 95% 
of the out-of-sample dataset is 
missing and is filled in using the 
incorrect imputation method 
Re-use the dataset provided by 
Muchlinski et al., which uses an 
incorrect imputation method  
Re-use the dataset provided by 
Muchlinski et al., which uses an 
incorrect imputation method  
 
Use several proxy variables for 
the outcome as predictors (e.g., 
colwars, cowwars, sdwars, all 
proxies for civil war), leading to 
near perfect accuracy 
 
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1.0
Reported results
(AUC)
Corrected results
(AUC)
Reported results
(AUC)
Corrected results
(AUC)
Reported results
(AUC)
Corrected results
(AUC)
Reported results
(Accuracy)
Corrected results
(Accuracy)
Logistic Regression 1
Logistic Regression 2
Logistic Regression 3
Random Forests
Logistic Regression
Random Forests 1
Random Forests 2
AdaBoost
GBT
Logistic Regression 1
Logistic Regression 2
Logistic Regression 3
Random Forests
AdaBoost
Extratrees
Lasso
Logistic Regression
Random Forest
SVM
Figure 1. A comparison of reported and corrected results in civil war prediction papers published in top political science journals. The
main ndings of each of these papers are invalid due to various forms of data leakage: Muchlinski et al. (2016) impute the training and
test data together, Colaresi & Mahmood (2017) and Wang (2019) incorrectly reuse an imputed dataset, and Kaufman et al. (2019) use
proxies for the target variable which causes data leakage. The use of model info sheets (Section 3) would detect leakage in every paper.
When we correct these errors, complex ML models (such as Adaboost and Random Forests) do not perform substantively better than
decades-old Logistic Regression models for civil war prediction in each case. Eac

=== PAGE 5 ===
Leakage and the Reproducibility Crisis in ML-based Science
Kapoor and Narayanan
the urgency of addressing reproducibility failures, there are
no systemic solutions that have been deployed for these
failures. Scientic communities are discovering the same
failure modes across disciplines, but have yet to converge
on best practices for avoiding reproducibility failures.
Calling attention to and addressing these widespread fail-
ures is vital to maintaining public condence in ML-based
science. At the same time, the use of ML methods is still
in its infancy in many scientic elds. Addressing repro-
ducibility failures pre-emptively in such elds can correct a
lot of scientic research that would otherwise be awed.
2.4. Towards a solution: A taxonomy of data leakage
We now provide our taxonomy of data leakage errors in
ML-based science. Such a taxonomy can enable a better un-
derstanding of why leakage occurs and inform potential so-
lutions. Our taxonomy is comprehensive and addresses data
leakage arising during the data collection, pre-processing,
modeling and evaluation steps. In particular, our taxonomy
addresses all cases of data leakage that we found in our
survey (Table 1).
[L1] Lack of clean separation of training and test
dataset. If the training dataset is not separated from the
test dataset during all pre-processing, modeling and evalu-
ation steps, the model has access to information in the test
set before its performance is evaluated. Since the model
has access to information from the test set at training time,
the model learns relationships between the predictors and
the outcome that would not be available in additional data
drawn from the distribution of interest. The performance of
the model on this data therefore does not reect how well
the model would perform on a new test set drawn from the
same distribution of data.
[L1.1] No test set. Using the same dataset for training as
well as testing the model is a text-book example of overt-
ting, which leads to overoptimisic performance estimates
(Kuhn & Johnson, 2013).
[L1.2] Pre-processing on training and test set. Using the en-
tire dataset for any pre-processing steps such as imputation
or over/under sampling. For instance, using oversampling
before splitting the data into training and test sets leads to
an imperfect separation between the training and test sets
since data generated using oversampling from the training
set will also be present in the test set.
[L1.3] Feature selection on training and test set. Feature
selection on the entire dataset results in using information
about which feature performs well on the test set to make
a decision about which features should be included in the
model.
[L1.4] Duplicates in datasets. If a dataset with duplicates
is used for the purposes of training and evaluating an ML
model, the same data could exist in the training as well as
test set.
[L2] Model uses features that are not legitimate. If the
model has access to features that should not be legi

=== PAGE 6 ===
Leakage and the Reproducibility Crisis in ML-based Science
Kapoor and Narayanan
to ensure correct performance evaluation. Methods such as
block cross validation can partition the dataset strategically
so that the performance evaluation does not suffer from data
leakage and overoptimism (Roberts et al., 2017; Valavi et al.,
2021). Handling nonindependence between the training and
test sets in generali.e., without any assumptions about in-
dependence in the datais a hard problem, since we might
not know the underlying dependency structure of the task in
many cases (Malik, 2020).
[L3.3] Sampling bias in test distribution. Sampling bias
in the choice of test dataset can lead to data leakage. One
example of sampling bias is spatial bias, which refers to
choosing the test data from a geographic location but mak-
ing claims about model performance in other geographic
locations as well. Another example is selection bias, which
entails choosing a non-representative subset of the dataset
for evaluation. For example, Bone et al. (2015) highlight
that in a study on predicting autism using ML models, ex-
cluding the data corresponding to borderline cases of autism
leads to leakage since the test set is no longer representative
of the general population about which claims are made. In
addition, borderline cases of autism are often the most tricky
to diagnose, so excluding them the evaluation set is likely
to lead to overoptimistic results. Cases of leakage due to
sampling bias can often be subtle. For example, Zech et al.
(2018) nd that models for pneumonia prediction trained on
images from one hospital do not generalize to images from
another hospital due to subtle differences in how images are
generated in each hospital.
A model may have leakage when the distribution about
which the scientic claim is made does not match the distri-
bution from which the evaluation set is drawn. ML models
may also suffer from a related, but distinct limitation: the
lack of generalization when we try to apply a result about
one population to another similar but distinct population.
Several issues with the generalization of ML models op-
erating under a distribution shift have been highlighted in
ML methods research, such as fragility towards adversarial
examples (Szegedy et al., 2014), image distortion and tex-
ture (Geirhos et al., 2018), and overinterpretation (Carter
et al., 2021). Robustness to distribution shift is an ongoing
area of work in ML methods research. Even slight shifts
in the target distribution can cause performance estimates
to change drastically (Recht et al., 2019). Despite ongoing
work to create ML methods that are robust to distribution
shift, best practices to deal with distribution shift currently
include testing the ML models on the data from the distribu-
tion we want to make claims about (Geirhos et al., 2020). In
ML-based science, where the aim is to create generalizable
knowledge, we should take results that claim to generalize to
a different popu

=== PAGE 7 ===
Leakage and the Reproducibility Crisis in ML-based Science
Kapoor and Narayanan
the intended use cases of ML models. They also addressed
fairness and transparency concerns: they require that the
performance of ML models on different groups of users
(e.g., on the basis of race, gender, age) is reported and
documented transparently. These model cards complement
the datasheets introduced by Gebru et al. (2021) to document
details about datasets in a standard format.
The use of checklists has also been impactful in improving
reporting practices in the few elds that have adopted them
(Han et al., 2017). While checklists and model cards pro-
vide concrete best practices for reporting standards (Mongan
et al., 2020; Collins et al., 2015; Mitchell et al., 2019; Garbin
& Marques, 2022), current efforts do not address pitfalls
arising due to leakage. Further, even though several sci-
entic eldsespecially those related to medicinehave
adopted checklists to improve reporting standards, most
checklists are developed for specic scientic or research
communities instead of ML-based science in general.
3.2. Scientic arguments to surface and prevent
leakage
When ML models are used to make scientic claims, it is
not enough to simply separate the training and test sets and
report performance metrics on the test set. Unlike research
in ML methods, where a models performance on a hypo-
thetical task (i.e., one that is not linked to a specic scientic
claim) is still of interest to the researcher in some cases (Raji
et al., 2021), in ML-based science, claims about a models
performance need to be connected to scientic claims using
explicit arguments. The burden of proof for ensuring the
correctness of these arguments is on the researcher making
the scientic claims (Lundberg et al., 2021).
In our models, we ask researchers to present three arguments
that are essential for determining that scientic results which
use ML methods do not suffer from data leakage. Note that
most ML-based science papers do not present any of the
three arguments, although they sometimes partially address
the rst argument (clean train-test separation) by report-
ing out-of-sample prediction performance. The arguments
below are based on our taxonomy of data leakage issues
presented in Section 2.4, and inform the main sections of
the model info sheet.
[L1] Clean train-test separation. The researcher needs to
argue why the test set does not interact with training data
during any of the preprocessing, modeling or evaluation
steps to ensure a clean train-test separation.
[L2] Each feature in the model is legitimate. The re-
searcher needs to argue why each feature used in their model
is legitimate, i.e., a claim made using each feature is of scien-
tic interest. Note that some models might use hundreds of
features. In such cases, it is even more important to reason
about the correctness of the features used, since the incorrect
use of a single feature in the model can cause leakage. That
said, the same

